good afternoon
and welcome back to dining street for an
update on
coronavirus as we enter autumn and
approach winter
and i'm first going to hand over to
chris to take us through the latest data
and then we will set out how we're going
to respond
thank you prime minister can i have the
first slide please
i think it's important to set uh what
the prime minister is going to say
in context so we're just going to run
through some of the recent data
from the uk uh and from england um and
we're starting off with the overall
rates
uh in terms of confirmed cases uh going
back
uh to april when obviously we had very
high numbers the numbers came
right down but as you can see on this
graph
the numbers are now going up and going
up really much more rapidly
over the last few days next slide please
it's important to think about this also
in terms of the ages where this is
happening
there's some very good news in this and
that's at the bottom of this graph
and what that shows is that in older
people and
in the younger children the rates remain
really quite flat but in some
age groups the rates are now going up
really quite sharply
at the top of this graph we have the
rates in people
aged 20 to 29 in the light green
and then 30 to 39 in the yellow
numbers but what you can also see is
some rapid upticks
elsewhere and in particular the light
blue
which is quite a broad age band of 10 to
19. i'll come back to that
number later next slide please
and looking at the test positivity rate
so this is the proportion of tests done
that turn out to be positive these are
following exactly the same
pattern and that's important because
that makes clear this is not just
because of increased testing
but this is actually a real phenomenon
where the numbers of cases are going
up next slide please
in this slide we have split out
the various ages from 11 to 21 years old
and in the bottom two lines what you
have is people in dark blue
11 to 14 and in the orange
15 to 16 and in those groups as you can
see
the rates of increase have been uh very
small indeed
but if you look at the group uh in who
are 17 to 18
in the olive color and 19 to 21
in the uh the magenta color both of
those have gone up
really quite steeply since the middle of
august
next slide please and again
exactly the same pattern is seen if you
see the test positivity so this is not
an effect
of greater testing in these groups
next slide please
importantly we also need to look at what
happens
if we do nothing in this situation or if
we have
if we intervene effectively and what we
have here
and this is a slightly complicated slide
but it is important to understand
the need for action is we have uh
three other major countries in europe
and what we've done is we moved the
timelines
so that uh for example france which is
in red
and the uk which is in blue
we've moved the timelines so that the
uk's
graph is brought four weeks
forward so that it overlies
the french graph and what you can see is
we're following a pattern extremely
similar
to what france followed and as you can
see
in france that rate has continued to go
up and the same is true
in spain but also you can see and this
is an example from belgium
in belgium the same sort of graph was
happening initially a rate went up quite
sharply in the way that it has here in
the uk
but then they took decisive action
and at that point the rates stabilized
and in fact
then subsequently began to come
gradually down so this is a clear
indication
that if you act rapidly and decisively
when these changes are happening there
is a reasonable chance or a good chance
of bringing the rates back down under
control
next slide please so we're now moving on
to
an animation and this is a graphic
to show how the spread occurred through
the uk
over the period in which we've had
coronavirus
so if we could start the graphic and
what this has is lots of hexagons
each one of them being numbers of cases
and the lighter the number
uh the uh the the smaller the number and
then they get darker and
these are the data for england there
would be something very similar
uh for scotland wales and northern
ireland and as you can see
through march and through april
the the graphs just get darker and
darker across the whole country
and then as people respond to
the request for social distancing as the
lockdown happens
they get lighter again across the whole
country
and things are improving all the way
through
july and uh into the beginning of august
and then you start to see the numbers
begin to creep up again and this is the
situation we now find ourselves in
where the darker colors again are
increased numbers initially
relatively concentrated but now we can
see this spreading
across the whole country so this is not
just in a very small number of places
this is across the country and that is
the reason why
uh we need uh to go on to act uh
if we're gonna end the animation at that
stage please
thank you very much right well thank you
very much chris and uh
it's clear from that very powerful uh
graphic that that powerful
slides that we must act and the most
important thing
for all of us is to remember the basics
first
wash your hands regularly and for 20
seconds
don't get back into the old habits
second wear a face covering over your
mouth
and nose if you're in an enclosed space
and in close contact with people you
don't normally meet
i know wearing a face covering feels odd
to some people i understand that
but face coverings do make it harder for
the virus to spread
so please wear one to protect others
third make space always stay two meters
away from people you don't
live with or one meter with extra
precautions
like extra ventilation screens or face
coverings
fourthly if you have covid symptoms get
a test
and self isolate we're now processing
1.2 million tests
per week to date we've carried out 15.4
million antigen tests that's more than
any other
country in europe and more per head than
other european countries like germany
and spain we're increasing our testing
capacity
further to meet rising demand
and you can help by only booking a test
if you have a fever a new continuous
cough
or you've lost your sense of taste or
smell
if you don't have those symptoms and you
haven't been asked to book a test
please don't so those are the
basics hands face space and get a test
if you have covered symptoms since the
pandemic began
we've asked you to reduce your social
contact
and limit your interactions with friends
and
family and i know that over time
the rules have become quite complicated
and confusing
confusing we've spoken to police
officers about
what they need for an effective
enforcement regime
and of course we've listened to feedback
from you
from the public so we're responding
and we are simplifying and strengthening
the rules making them easier for
everyone to understand
and for the police to enforce
i should stress that if we are to beat
the virus then everyone at all times
should limit social contact as much as
possible and
minimize interactions with other
households
it's safer to meet outdoors and you
should keep your distance from anyone
you don't live with
even if they're close friends or family
so in england from monday we're
introducing
the rule of six you must not
meet socially in groups of more than six
and if you do you will be breaking
the law this will apply in any setting
indoors or outdoors at home
or in the pub the ban will set out in
law
and be set out in law and it will be
enforced
by the police and anyone breaking the
rules
risks being dispersed fined and possibly
arrested this
single measure replaces both the
existing ban
on gatherings of more than 30 and the
current guidance on allowing
two households to meet indoors now you
only need
to remember the rule of six
there will be some limited exemptions
for example if a single household or
support bubble
is larger than six and obviously they
can still
gather copied secure
venues like places of worship gyms
restaurants
hospitality venues can still
hold more than six in total
within those venues however there must
not be
individual groups larger than six
and groups must not mix socially or form
larger groups education and work
settings
are unaffected kovid's secure weddings
and funerals can go ahead up to a limit
of 30 people and
organized sport will still be able to
proceed
as we found on previous occasions this
rule of six will of course
throw up difficult cases
for example two whole households will no
longer be able to meet
if they would together exceed the limit
of six people
and i'm sorry about that and
i wish that we did not have to
take this step but as your prime
minister
i must do what is necessary to stop the
spread
of the virus and to save lives
and of course we will keep the rule of
six under
constant review and only keep it in
place
as long as it's necessary i also want to
see and the public wants to see
stronger enforcement of the rules which
are already in place so
i've tasked the cabinet with increasing
enforcement and i would like to thank
the police
as always and other authorities for the
work they're doing
to keep us all safe in future
premises and venues where people meet
socially
will be legally required to request the
contact details of a member
of every party record and retain these
details
for 21 days and provide them to nhs test
and trace
without delay when required
we will support local authorities to
make further and faster use of their
powers
to close venues that are breaking the
rules and pose a risk
to public health fines will be levied
against hospitality venues that fail
to ensure their premises remain coveted
secure
we will boost the enforcement capacity
of local authorities
by introducing kovid secure marshals to
help ensure
social distancing in town and city
centers and by setting up
a register of environmental health
officers
the local authorities can draw a draw
upon
for support we will simplify the
passenger locator form needed for
travelling
to the uk and take measures to ensure
these are completed and checked before
the departure border force
will step up enforcement efforts at the
border
to ensure arrivals are complying with
the quarantine rules
we will also restrict the opening hours
of premises initially
in some local areas
at the present time we must also i'm
afraid revise
plans to pilot larger audiences in
venues later this month and review
our intention to return audiences to
stadiums and
conference centers from the 1st of
october that doesn't mean we're going to
scrap the program
entirely we just have to review it and
and abridge it
and the culture secretary will say more
about that
shortly i want to be absolutely
clear this is not these measures are not
a
another national lockdown
the whole point of them is to avoid
a second national lockdown
by bearing down on social contract our
contact and
improving enforcement we can keep
schools and businesses
open in the knowledge that they are
covered secure
i've always said schools and colleges
should only ever
be shut again as a very very
last resort as the
chief medical officer chief scientific
advisor have said
the long-term risks to children's
life chances of not going to school
are very significant and far greater
than the health
risks now of going back to school far
far greater
indeed it's been fantastic to see so
many children
back in school this term and i want once
again
to thank all our teachers and to
reassure parents
pupils that schools are safe
university terms will also begin
soon now opening universities is
critical
again for students life chances and
again
the health risks to individuals
are low of course many students many
university students are in the
age bracket where we've seen the
infection rates
rise recently as chris was just
explaining
my message to students is simple
please for the sake of your education
for your parents and your grandparents
health
wash your hands cover your face make
space
and don't socially gather in groups
of more than six now and when term
starts
today the department for education is
publishing updated guidance for
universities
on how they can operate in a coveted
secure way
including a clear request not to send
students home
in the event of an outbreak so as to
avoid
spreading the virus across the country
and i'm very grateful
to universities for their continued
cooperation
and planning for the return of students
the measures i've set out today will
help us
control the virus but won't on their own
be enough to allow a more significant
return to normality patrick is going to
set out in a moment
where we are on vaccines and treatments
but we're not
there yet and of course there are no
guarantees so over the summer
we've therefore been working up our on
alternative plan
which could allow life to return
to closer to normality and
that plan is based on mass testing
up to now if you think about it we've
been using testing primarily
to identify people who are positive
so that we can isolate them from the
community and
protect high-risk high-risk groups and
that will continue to be our priority
we're working hard to increase our
testing capacity
to 500 000 tests a day
by the end of october but in future
in the near future we hope we want to
start
using testing to identify people who are
negative
who don't have chronovirus who are not
infectious so we can allow them
to behave in a more normal way in the
knowledge
they can't infect anyone else with the
virus
and we think we hope we believe that
new types of tests which are simple
quick
and scalable will become available and
they use
swabs or saliva and can turn around
results in 90 or even 20 minutes
crucially it should be possible to to
deploy these tests
on a far bigger scale than any country
has yet achieved literally
millions of tests being processed every
single day and that level of tests
would allow people to lead more normal
lives without the need
for social distancing theaters and
sports venues
could test an audience all audience
members
one day and let in all those with a
negative result all those
who are not infectious workplaces
could be opened up to all those who test
negative
in the morning to behave in a way that
was
exactly uh as in the world before
covid and those isolating because they
are a contact
or quarantining after traveling abroad
could after a period be tested
and released now that's an ambitious
agenda but we're going to pilot this
approach in salford
from next month with audiences in
indoor and outdoor venues
and then we hope to go nationwide
there are a number of challenges
we need the technology to work we need
to source the necessary
materials to manufacture so many tests
we need to put in place
an efficient distribution network and we
need to work through the numerous
logistical challenges and as i say we're
not there yet and i should
repeat that as we manage this period
of high demand it is especially
important i repeat this
that if individuals don't have symptoms
symptoms
and have not been specifically advised
to take a test they should not be coming
forward
for a test because they could be taking
a test away
from someone who really needs it our
plan this moon shot that i'm
describing will require a giant
collaborative
effort from government from business
from public health professional
scientists logistics experts and
many many more work is underway now
and we will get on at pace
until we get there around the clock
we're hopeful
this approach will be widespread by the
spring and if everything comes
together it may be possible even for
some of the most
difficult sectors like the theaters to
have life much closer to normal before
christmas
as i said before all this progress
is contingent on continued
scientific advances and they were
hopeful
i cannot 100 guarantee that we'll
that those advances will be made and
that is why
it's so important that we take these
tough
measures now i believe that we will
continue to drive this forest down and
that we will beat this virus
before too long so
let's work together let's follow the
rules
meet in groups of no more than six
wash your hands cover your face make
space
thank you i'll now hand over to patrick
we'll set out the latest on vaccines and
treatments and then we'll go to
questions from the public and from the
media thank you prime minister good
afternoon
vaccines and and drug treatments are
going to be a
very important part of how we eventually
get on top of this virus and i want to
just update you on where things are
so there are something like 200 vaccine
projects across the world
eight of those are in phase three
clinical trials that means they're in
the last stage of clinical trials and
i'll say a word more about that in just
a minute
some of those clinical trials will read
out this year
many next year so we start to get some
indication hopefully before the end of
the year
of vaccines that do work and have the
right safety profile
what we do know already is that many of
these vaccines
are showing the right immune response
so people who have been vaccinated
volunteers have been vaccinated
are generating an immune response
against the virus
we don't know how long that lasts for
yet but the immune response looks good
in many cases
and it's seen in the elderly as well as
others that's a very important step
along the way of making a vaccine
in the uk the vaccine's task force
has made sure that of the vaccines that
are more advanced
six of those will be available
there are options put on getting hold of
any one of those six
and they're in four different classes of
vaccine so the vaccines task force has
made sure that we've covered
different types of vaccine and that
there are ways to get the supply
and that the manufacturing base in the
uk can be bolstered to make sure that we
can also
make some of it or do some of the
process here if necessary
just a word about the oxford vaccine
which has been in the news today
the oxford vaccine in many ways is right
at the front because it's been into more
people
than anyone else and the trials as
you've
seen reported have been paused at the
moment
because of an investigation into a
potential unwanted effect
that is not an unusual thing in a phase
three program that's precisely
why phase three clinical trials happen
we need to make sure with these vaccines
that they work they work well enough and
they are safe
and therefore a pause obviously is not
good you'd rather not see any side
effects but inevitably you do see
something
and it's sensible to look at that very
seriously and understand what's going on
so i think you should expect in some of
the other trials that you will see
situations where things are paused and
then restarted
and of course we need to find out
whether these vaccines are safe that is
the critical
importance of doing these studies and
why it's wrong
as many of the manufacturers have said
just this week it's wrong
to just jump over those stages and
approve a vaccine on hope
you have to do it on evidence so
vaccines are progressing some will read
out this year in terms of efficacy and
safety
and i think there's a reasonable chance
that therefore we can think about
the possibility of vaccination next year
sometime
at larger levels and that is pretty much
what we thought at the beginning and
that remains the case
so some optimism on vaccines on
therapeutics
there are over 500 different medicines
being looked at across the world
it's worth saying that the recovery
trial which is the trial that was run in
the uk
remains the largest trial of covid in
the world with over 12 000 people
it was very very important during the
first wave of this
epidemic to show what didn't work and it
showed that hydroxychloroquine doesn't
work in hospitalized patients and it
showed that the combination of hiv
treatments which people thought might
work didn't work in the hospitalized
patients
but what it also showed which is an
incredibly important part
of improving the care of patients with
cove to end up in hospital
is that dexamethasone a steroid very
easily available
inexpensive widely available across the
world
works very effectively for patients in
hospital
who require oxygen and cause something
like a 25
reduction in death so we know that
steroids work the who have endorsed the
use of steroids now
in those patients and doctors across the
world
and in the uk of course are working out
better ways of treating patients in
hospital
there will be other such drugs coming
along that impact the disease
whether that's to modify hospitalized
care
or whether it's to prevent infection
with antivirals which are now being
tried and
specific anti-coronavirus drugs are now
being developed
and there are produced antibodies so not
ones made in the body but ones made
actually in the laboratory which can
then be given back into patients
that are now being trialled as well that
may have an effect
to prevent the virus so there's good
progress on the drug front
with as i say with steroids something
that is applicable right the way across
the world and something which is already
having an impact on the improved
care that's possible of the disease now
so both vaccines and therapeutics
positive news
but a long way to go it's very important
that as we go into winter and we get
more infections and i think that's
inevitable we will see more infections
that we run clinical trials in the uk to
get answers to questions
we shouldn't just guess what works we
need to test and therefore all of us
any of us that is unfortunate enough to
catch it it's important that we
volunteer to be in clinical trials so we
get the answer to these questions as
soon as we can
thank you brilliant thanks very much
patrick let's go to a question from
members of the public jamie from asha
i work in a day center for people who
have learning disabilities
and my workplace cannot be reopened at
the present time
will the follow scheme be extended for
those of us who cannot return to work
due to the nature of their jobs
well thank you very much jamie i think
what i
can can certainly say to you is that we
are going to continue to do everything
we possibly can uh to support those who
uh can't work in the way that they uh
that they want to i think one of the
difficulties with the with the furlough
scheme
uh if we uh extend it uh more widely
is that you know you're just keeping
people uh in suspended animation when
really we want people to get back to
work if they possibly can
in a covered secure way but jobs such as
yours
should certainly be uh supported and uh
and protected and
i will look at the uh the issue of
daycare centers and why
exactly it is uh that you can't return
uh to work in the way
that you want to ensure that you get the
support that you need
can we go to michael from birmingham
michael from birmingham i understand
education is important also that
children
are least at risk of serious illness but
what provisions are in place or are
being put in place for children in
school with vulnerable parents
and the fast rising cases around
the uk well uh michael you're asking uh
i'm i think i'll i'll ask chris and
patrick also to say something about it
but this is the crucial thing
uh because at the moment yes it is true
that we are seeing transmission amongst
this particular
uh group of of young people mainly 17 to
21 year olds uh what we don't want to
see
is uh transmission to their parents and
to their grandparents at the moment as
you will have seen from the
the graphs we saw earlier thankfully
we're not seeing
uh that much transmission in schools i
think i'm writing
i'm right in saying uh but clearly where
there are particularly
uh vulnerable uh parents uh whether uh
there are there are
uh parents who are at risk uh because of
their own circumstances
they should take uh special precautions
uh of whether through
uh shielding or or otherwise and steps
should be taken to ensure that if there
is an outbreak in the school
uh concerned uh if so if there if there
is a threat
from kids to those parents uh then uh
action should be taken immediately in
that school but
uh chris you want to comment on what's
going on in
in schools and well the only thing i'd
add prime minister is is that if
at the moment the rates are still very
low
if there were to be a change in that
whether to be a a much broader
increase in rates including school-aged
children i think that the current
policies would have to be looked at
again as in many other areas
but at this point the rates in schools
are very low there will be some school
outbreaks
uh but that's the current situation
thank you very much thanks michael
and uh and jamie let's go to laura
koonsberg of the bbc
thank you very much prime minister um
you've admitted today the advice has
been confusing
so why should the public listen to you
today for the last few weeks you've been
telling people to go back to work to go
and eat out
and suddenly you're putting limits on
people's lives again
and if i could ask professor witty and
sir patrick how long
do you think these new restrictions will
need to be in place
well thanks very much laura well first
of all
we're dealing with a pandemic that has
evolved over many
months and uh in in that period we've
been responding to
uh the disease in its in its various
phases and
it still remains true by the way uh that
we want people to
be able be confident to to go back to
work in a
covered secure way and of course we want
uh pupils to be back in school that's a
priority
as i said earlier on we want uh
university students to feel secure to go
back to
kovid secure universities so the the
whole objective
of what we're doing is to
uh allow all that to continue
and that's why what we're doing today
and i make no bones about it
is to clarify to simplify
uh to intensify the message and for
everybody to understand
uh the rule of of six uh everybody's
heard of the figure of six before six
people
are outdoors but we now want to
intensify
uh that ma that that message uh don't
gather in
social groups of more than six indoors
uh
or outdoors and this will be legally
enforced and the the reason that we're
doing this
as i said earlier on is to prevent
another wholesale national lockdown of
the kind
that we had in march that's the
objective
everybody i think in the country will
know and it's been widely reported
that the period over autumn and winter
which is the period when all respiratory
viruses
are have an advantage because people
crowd together
more things are done in indoors amongst
other reasons
is going to be difficult so the period
between now and spring
is going to be difficult because this is
a respiratory virus
i think in terms of the existing
restrictions
people should see this as the next block
of time
uh that may not last uh for
uh many months but it's very unlikely to
be just over in two or three weeks so i
think that there's a block of time
and at that point uh we will we will
collectively
as a nation have to look again at where
things are and work out what are the
right things to do so
people shouldn't just see this as a very
short-term thing they should see it over
the next period
but i think putting an exact time on it
i think is very difficult
thanks laura robert peston itv
i'm newt robert yeah
prime minister uh on the 17th of july
you were hopeful that things would be
getting back to normal
uh christmas we've today announced very
significant restrictions
on our ability to socialize because
woody's just said these are going to go
on
certainly not for weeks probably months
is christmas now
effectively cancelled um and
and separately um prime minister
uh john so john major your predecessor
is prime as prime minister john major
has
just said that for generations britain's
word has been accepted by friend and foe
and he says that you're raising the
possibility of breaching and
international law by changing the terms
of the withdrawal treaty
would mean that we've lost something
beyond price that may never be regained
what would you say to sir john major
well thanks uh robert first first of all
on the
uh whether we're going to get things
back to normal at all by
by christmas i'm i'm still hopeful
as i've said before that in
many ways we could be able we could be
able
to get some aspects of our lives back to
normal
uh by christmas and i i talked just now
about how you could do that uh through
that moonshot
of a daily testing everybody gets a
a pregnancy style test a rapid
turnaround test
in the morning uh 15 minutes later you
know whether you're
infectious or not you may not know
whether you're infected or not but you
know whether you're infectious
or not and that gives you a kind of
passport a lesser passe a
a freedom to mingle
with everybody else who is similarly not
infectious in a way that has is
currently
impossible and you might be able to do
that
uh in in the theaters in cinemas at
sporting venues
and so on uh in in places of work that's
the the opportunity
and we're we're aiming for that uh
robert
we're driving for that as i've said just
now we cannot be 100 sure
that we can deliver that uh in its
entirety
but what i do think we can do if we can
follow the
uh whatever happens if we can follow the
guidance
strictly if we follow the the rule of
six then what we can certainly do
is get on with uh controlling
this virus i think we've got a very good
chance of controlling the current
uh upturn in the in the numbers of
of infections and continue with the most
important thing which is
uh the openings up of the economy that
we've seen
since uh since june the first since the
july the 4th
openings continue with school
pupils with students being back at their
places of education which is so
vital for their future continue with
the movement forward the forward
movement of our economy so
that's what this measure is all about
it's a stitch in time
uh to save nine uh if you like that's
the that's the purpose
and uh and and that's why it's important
that everybody
is so is so vigilant with the rule of
six
and on your second point
i'd you know i have to say of course i
see it very differently
i see uh the risk uh that uh
certain i think extreme interpretations
of the
treaty might place uh to the uh
peace process in northern ireland to the
good friday
agreement uh nobody wants to see a
barrier down the
irish sea so what we're doing which i
think would be very very injurious so
what we're doing
is putting a uh a safety net
beneath which things cannot go wrong
to protect peace and protect the the
settlement
in our in our united kingdom and that is
the the purpose of
what we're doing i'm gonna go next to uh
to beth
rigby of sky news thank you prime
minister just just to follow up on
robert's question on july the 17th your
exact words were
that you should be able to review
outstanding restrictions and allow a
more significant
return to normality from november at the
earliest
possibly in time for christmas can i
just be clear are you now
saying that without that mass testing
regime coming off between then and now
people watching this should
accept that they're going to have
smaller gatherings of family at
christmas and they're not going to be
able to have
a big party that perhaps they would have
been hoping for
and professor witty just to ask you when
i asked you a while back about your
biggest regret at the beginning of this
pandemic
you talked about the importance of mass
testing
now the director of testing sarah j
marsh has apologized to people unable to
get a test because of lab
processing issues being at her words a
critical
pinch point how worried are you that the
testing system is already
under strain before we've even hit
the winter okay
i'll hand over to the battery in a
second but beth look thanks for that i i
think the honest answer is
it is just too early to say um
we've got two big uh
projects that we're we're backing the
first is the change in public behavior
that we
hope to see through the announcements
that we're making today through the
uh through the rule of six for uh the
the plan to drive down
uh the current uh increase uh by
changing our behavior back again to
by adhering to uh the rule of six very
strictly
that we hope will uh will work uh we're
also hoping as i
as i said uh that the moonshot approach
will will work and that we'll be able to
deliver
a uh mass testing uh lateral flow type
mouse testing
that will give people the the the
freedom pass the less they pass the
the knowledge that uh they are not
infectious and can
uh can uh hang out with other people who
are not infectious in a in a
in a sort of pre-covered way now that's
that's a very ambitious plan
but we're working on it uh very very
hard and very fast as as you can imagine
both those were backing both those
horses and
uh were were were backing them flat out
but the thing we need now
the thing we need now is for uh
everybody to work together
to enforce the rule of six and and and
get the current spike
uh get the current spike down but uh
obviously we'll keep the public informed
uh uh about all the progress we're
making
sorry forgive me chris um
when we started off the first wave of
this in in
in the uk uh we had low thousands of
tests a day
and that really constrained what we
could do and that was very difficult
made it very difficult for us to do
proper planning i think what you saw at
the beginning of this
presentation depressing though in many
ways it is is we are now in a much
better place we do actually now have a
much
greater understanding in considerable
detail as to what is going on and we're
able to
provide testing across the system that's
the glass half full
glass half empty is clearly at any point
there are more things we could do if we
had more testing now the biggest gains
are near the beginning
because you're moving into being able to
test people who've got symptoms
uh healthcare workers where their
outbreaks and so on but
there are still constraints and that's
one of the reasons it's important as
with
very very many other things in the nhs
this is no different that it's
critical that those who do need to be
tested in particular people with
symptoms or ones where people of
uh situations where people have been
told to for a variety of reasons
social care working for example uh get
tested
but it is also important that people who
really don't have a clear clinical
indication
currently don't because we do still have
constraints and i think that's what
this is this is demonstrating if we get
more testing
every significant uplift of testing we
get
we can do more things and one of the
things that i
hear quite often when i hear kind of
debates in the public is people will say
well can't you test for this and can't
you test that the answer is
well let's get the testing capacity
first and then work out what we're going
to do with it and at any given level of
capacity
you can do more things that actually
open up more parts of the system and
the prime minister gave an idea about
what you do if you had a really large
in a sense huge change in testing if the
technology was there to do that so
i think you know we have to be uh honest
with ourselves
that we're in a much better place than
we were but there are still constraints
and those constraints are not just
magically going to disappear
and the demand on testing has increased
uh outpacing at certain points our
increase in testing and that may happen
for a little while i think
thanks very much chris and uh thanks a
lot beth gordon rayner of the daily
telegraph
thank you prime minister uh can i ask
you do you feel comfortable
making it illegal for grandparents in
large families to
meet their grandchildren potentially for
months uh when they might argue that
those measures should be targeted at
young people who as we've just heard are
primarily
responsible for the increase in
infections um and can i just ask the
scientific advisors
have you decided the exact criteria for
lifting the restrictions
um and allowing families to meet again
well gordon
of course the the answer is of course i
don't feel uh comfortable about it
breaks my heart to
have to insist on these uh restrictions
upon uh individuals upon uh families
grandparents uh nobody uh wants to do
this nobody in government conceivably
wants to
uh this is not not something that we uh
seek the trouble is that the
people who think that they can take
responsibility for their own
health and take their own risk i'm
afraid misunderstanding
the situation and that's allows chris
and battery to come on this
it's not it's not just the the risk to
yourself alas but
you can be at any age you can be a a
vehicle
a a a vector for the disease
and so young people as you rightly say
gordon
are overwhelmingly now uh getting it
as the as the graphs just showed but
they
are more than capable of transmitting it
to
the much more vulnerable older
generation and i would love to
uh be able to show you evidence now
gordon that the disease has somehow
become uh
less dangerous yes it's true we've got
better treatments
but if you i'm afraid if you look at
what's happening in some other countries
if you if you
see what's happening around the world
once you get high levels
of infection i'm afraid the deaths
eventually start to uh take place
as well and that's what we must avoid
we've got to protect uh our health care
system but we've got to save lives and
that's
that's what we're going to to do and uh
so uh
that's why we're instituting uh this
very tough enforcement of the
of the of the rule of six but uh
i i wanna stress gordon something that
you know i know that
uh you and all sensible people campaign
for uh
the reason we're doing this is precisely
because
we want to prevent a wider
lock down a wider damage to
the economy and that's the and indeed i
think the
the more decisive the action we can take
now
the greater the chance uh and the the
the nearer
will be the day when uh we're able to
allow grandparents and others to
uh to meet each other in in a way that
they would want to but we have to take
decisive action now maybe respond to
some of the other points
i mean young people have a very very low
risk of deafness i mean really very low
indeed
but it doesn't mean that young people
can't get ill and we increasingly
recognize that some of those may be ill
for a prolonged period
the second point which the prime
minister's made is that if you look at
other countries
the spread amongst the young soon
soon changes to spread amongst older
people and therefore
when you look at the curves you see an
increase in positivity amongst young
people
you then get the spread to older people
you then start to see hospitalizations
go up
and you then start to see the deaths go
up and that's really what we need to
make sure
doesn't happen so the containment of
that is
really very important and in terms of
how you then reverse this i think the
data which chris showed tells you that
you need to monitor this continuously
and we need to see the r coming back
below one we need to see cases going
down
and you need to respond to what's
happening
not to judge what can happen in the
absence of
evidence you need to monitor this very
carefully
thanks very much patrick and thank you
gordon uh mesa hall daily express
thank you very much prime minister um if
i could ask the scientists um you've
talked in the past about the limited
public capacity for putting up with
social distancing and
the dangers of fatigue do you think
we're now reaching that point where
people can't or some sections of the
community can't endure it anymore and we
are going to have to become more
draconian
and um prime minister a lot of people
are going to conclude that we're going
backwards from what you've said today
are you worried that what you said is
going to cause more anxiety about return
to work and
and that will have an impact on the
economy
well can i just answer the the masonry
hunter
uh to chris and patrick just just to say
that the whole objective of this step is
to allow us to keep going forwards
uh if if you look at what we're doing
we're concentrating
on trying to to limit
uh people's behavior in a way that i
think alas has been causing
a transmission from household uh to
household uh we're the best one in the
world people have not
i'm afraid been totally following the
the the guidelines i think
observationally
uh you know you people will attest that
that you know we don't want i don't
certainly want to blame people but
and now is the time uh for us to to
focus uh to concentrate
and uh to enforce the rule of six
precisely mesa so that we can keep going
forward with the
economic openings up that we've been
able uh to do
and uh with uh with getting kids back
into school and
actually if you you mentioned confidence
i i think it's one of the
best things that's happened in the last
couple of weeks is that
parents uh teachers pupils have really
risen to it and
uh you know the numbers i'm seeing uh
it's 99.9 percent of schools uh
are open now i mean we can build on that
uh and uh
you know i think 80 uh something like 89
percent of
of of pupils are back in school
perhaps more in some places that's so
that's that's that's confidence
in action and very happy to see it
overwhelmingly uh i think the response
of the british public has been
absolutely uh magnificent over this and
people have taken great hardships
economic and social
and we all have to be be really aware
that the things that have to be done to
keep this virus under control until we
have
the technologies the drugs the vaccines
the tests that the prime minister and
patrick were talking about are damaging
they are socially damaging in the ways
that people talked about
for example meeting up with grandparents
they're clearly economically damaging
and they're damaging to other areas of
health other bits of the nhs which is
something i obviously care about
uh very deeply but we have to do them
because the alternative is worse
the alternative is an overwhelmed system
and all the things that go with it that
i think people were clear about
early on and what we as a society all of
us
are trying to do is do the minimum that
has to be done
so that we minimize the damage but
enough that things don't go out of
control
and what was clear in the last few while
a little while
is things had started to go out of
control and therefore we need to do
more but i don't see any evidence that
the british people
cannot endure what the british people
want to understand
is why this is happening and that we are
trying to
make sure that we're doing the minimum
necessary and not going further than we
have to
but at this point you know the graphs
are going up but you can't argue with
those numbers
yeah and i think chris is it absolutely
it's thanks to the resolve and the
collective action of the of the british
people uh that we've
we've you know been able to achieve what
we have and and and
and get the virus down in the numbers of
deaths done in the way that we did over
the last
uh over the last few months and uh all
we're saying now is you know let's
let's focus let's let's look at the uh
the rule of six and enforce it
and and and turn this curve down uh
as well uh thanks mesa hugo guy of the
eye
prime minister your new curbs on uh
social gathering are another blow for
the travel industry
with that in mind are you hoping to use
your moonshot
testing plan to change reduce or remove
the quarantine requirements
at the border and on the moonshot plans
can i just ask
um professor whitty and sir patrick
is the technology behind that reliable
is it has it been tested somewhere else
are we confident that
that this is a plan that can work
sometime in the relatively near future
uh look hugo the the the measures we're
announcing today certainly not intended
to be
uh have have any cause any extra burdens
for the
for the travel industry and i really
appreciate the difficulties that
uh industry has been going through the
aviation sector is a colossal importance
to our country i think we have the third
biggest aviation sector anywhere in the
in the world we want to get people
flying as fast and efficiently
as we can and yes of course you go we're
going to look at all the ways we
possibly can
with with new technology with more with
better
testing to deliberate people to to fly
in the way that they
that they want to that's an absolute
priority uh for the government
uh so do you want me to do it well i'm
happy to go and
come in chris um i mean on the testing
some some of the increase in testing
you can do with established technologies
and that's that's known so that's a sort
of scaling
uh problem uh some of them we don't yet
know that they
uh work so things like lateral flow
tests are not yet being used widely
they're not being validated
um there are prototypes which look as
though they
have some effect but they've got to be
tested properly and so there are as
always with technologies unknowns and we
would be completely wrong to assume that
this is a slam dunk that can definitely
happen i think this needs to be tested
carefully yeah i know just i mean just
to add to that
um the underlying technology is used for
other diseases in terms of diagnosis so
it's not a
complete uh wild guess this is something
that's building on
very established uh principles but um
the quote and i don't i
my own view is that i think it's likely
we will have tests of this sort
at some point in the not too distant
future
but uh that not too distant future
covers quite a wide
time range and i think it's important
that what we don't do
is pin ourselves to a date and say by
this time this will be
achieved because that is not the way
science moves we do have to as patrick
says
be absolutely sure that these tests work
and that they work
at scale and that's what we will need to
be trying to develop over the next uh
period
thanks very much chris well like i mean
a very important
uh dose of realism and and common sense
but we remain extremely ambitious
about the whole program and i do think
that a lot of progress can be made
in a short time and you've seen the the
progress that has already been made in
the
in the therapies and the whole uh
testing operation
uh thank you all very much for for
watching or listening
uh i hope everybody gets the the message
it's it's very simple it remains
uh hands face uh make space
get a test if you have symptoms but uh
enforce now enforce now observe and
enforce that rule
of six socialize in gatherings of no
more than six
uh outside or inside and that's the way
i think i will beat the current outbreak
thank you very much
thank you the prime minister bringing to
an
end this downing street briefing uh
joined there by his
advisers of course um we used to have
these on a daily basis didn't we earlier
in the uh
during the lockdown days but now these
briefings few and far between but of
course see
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news